nuXmv 1.0 User Manual - Bozzano Cavada Cimatti Dorigatti Griggio Mariotti Micheli Move Roveri Tonetta - 2014
============================================================================================================

Abstract
--------

This paper describes the nuXmv symbolic model checker for finite- and
infinite-state synchronous transition systems. nuXmv is the evolution of the
nuXmv open source model checker. It builds on and extends nuXmv along two main
directions. For finite-state systems it complements the basic verification
techniques of nuXmv with state-of-the-art verification algorithms. For
infinite-state systems, it extends the nuXmv language with new data types,
namely Integers and Reals, and it provides advanced SMT-based model checking
techniques.

Besides extended functionalities, nuXmv has been optimized in terms of
performance to be competitive with the state of the art. nuXmv has been used in
several industrial projects as verification back-end, and it is the basis for
several extensions to cope with requirements analysis, contract based design,
model checking of hybrid systems, safety assessment, and software model
checking.

This work was carried out within the D-MILS project, which is partially funded
under the European Commission’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7).

---
- id: nuxmv-model-checker
  type: chapter
  author:
  -   family: Cavada
      given: Roberto
  -   family: Cimatti
      given: Alessandro
  -   family: Dorigatti
      given: Michele
  -   family: Griggio
      given: Alberto
  -   family: Mariotti
      given: Alessandro
  -   family: Micheli
      given: Andrea
  -   family: Mover
      given: Sergio
  -   family: Roveri
      given: Marco
  -   family: Tonetta
      given: Stefano
  editor:
  -   family: Biere
      given: Armin
  -   family: Bloem
      given: Roderick
  issued:
  -   year: 2014
  title: The nuXmv symbolic model checker
  container-title: 'Computer aided verification: 26th international conference, cAV 2014, held as part of the vienna summer of logic, vSL 2014, vienna, austria, july 18-22, 2014. proceedings'
  publisher: Springer International Publishing
  publisher-place: Cham
  page: 334-342
...

SAL 2 - Moura Owre Ruess Rushby Shankar Sorea Tiwari - 2004
===========================================================

Abstract
--------

SAL 2 augments the specification language and explicit-state model checker of
SAL 1 with high-performance symbolic and bounded model checkers, and with novel
*infinite bounded* and *witness* model checkers. The bounded model checker can
use several different SAT solvers, while the infinite bounded model checker
similarly can use several different ground decision procedures. SAL 2 provides a
scriptable API for its basic model checking and analysis functions that can be
used to extend the system. All four new model checkers are implemented using
this interface. Its high-level specification language and wide range of model
checkers make SAL convenient for those seeking a ready-to-use solution, while
its scriptability and flexible choice of backend analyzers should make it
attractive to those seeking an experimental platform.

---
-   id: expl-state-model-checker-sal-2
    type: paper-conference
    author:
    -   family: Moura
        given: Leonardo
        dropping-particle: de
    -   family: Owre
        given: Sam
    -   family: Rueß
        given: Harald
    -   family: Rushby
        given: John
    -   family: Shankar
        given: N.
    -   family: Sorea
        given: Maria
    -   family: Tiwari
        given: Ashish
    editor:
    -   family: Alur
        given: Rajeev
    -   family: Peled
        given: Doron
    issued:
    -   year: 2004
        month: 7
    title: SAL 2
    container-title: Computer-aided verification, CAV 2004
    collection-title: Lecture notes in computer science
    publisher: Springer-Verlag
    publisher-place: Boston, MA
    page: 496-500
    volume: 3114
...
